---
title: CBOR tags for IPv4 and IPv6 addresses and prefixes
abbrev: CBOR-IP
docname: draft-ietf-cbor-network-addresses-11

stand_alone: true

ipr: trust200902
area: Internet
wg: CBOR Working Group
kw: Internet-Draft
cat: std
consensus: true

pi:    # can use array (if all yes) or hash here
  toc: yes
  sortrefs:   # defaults to yes
  symrefs: yes

author:


- ins: M. Richardson
  name: Michael Richardson
  org: Sandelman Software Works
  email: mcr+ietf@sandelman.ca

- name: Carsten Bormann
  org: Universität Bremen TZI
  email: cabo@tzi.org
  country: Germany

normative:
  RFC8949: cbor
  RFC8610: cddl

informative:
  IANA.cbor-tags: tags
  RFC3542:
  RFC4007:
  RFC4001:
  RFC6991:
  RFC7042:

--- abstract

This specification defines two CBOR Tags for use with IPv6 and IPv4 addresses and prefixes.

[^track]

[^track]: RFC-EDITOR-please-remove: This work is tracked at https://github.com/cbor-wg/cbor-network-address

--- middle

# Introduction

{{RFC8949}} defines a number of CBOR Tags for common items.
Tags 260 and 261 were later defined in drafts listed with IANA {{-tags}}.
These tags were intended to cover addresses (260) and prefixes (261).
Tag 260 distinguishes between IPv6, IPv4, and MAC {{RFC7042}} addresses only through the length of the  byte string, making it impossible, for example, to drop trailing zeros in the encoding of IP addresses.  Tag 261 was not documented well enough for use.

This specification defines tags 54 and 52 achieving
an explicit indication of IPv6 or IPv4 by the tag number.
These new tags are intended to be used in preference to tags 260 and
261.
They provide formats for IPv6 and IPv4 addresses, prefixes,
and addresses with prefixes, achieving an explicit indication of IPv6 or IPv4.
The prefix format omits trailing zeroes in the address part.
(Due to the complexity of testing, the value of omitting trailing
zeros for the pure address format was considered non-essential and
support for that is not provided in this specification.)
This specification does not deal with MAC addresses ({{Section 2 of
RFC7042}}) such as they are used for Ethernet.

# Terminology

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

# Protocol

## Three Forms

### Addresses

These tags can be applied to byte strings to represent a single address.

This form is called the Address Format.

### Prefixes

When applied to an array that starts with an unsigned integer, they represent a
CIDR-style prefix of that length.

When the Address Format (i.e., without prefix) appears in a context where a prefix is expected, then it is to be assumed that all bits are relevant.
That is, for IPv4, a /32 is implied, and for IPv6, a /128 is implied.

This form is called the Prefix Format.

### Interface Definition

When applied to an array that starts with a byte string, which stands
for an IP address, followed by an unsigned integer giving the bit
length of a prefix built out of the first `length` bits of the
address, they represent information that is commonly used to specify
both the network prefix and the IP address of an interface.

The length of the byte string is always 16 bytes (for IPv6) and 4 bytes (for IPv4).

This form is called the Interface Format.

Interface Format definitions support an optional third element to the array, which is to be used as the IPv6 Link-Local zone identifier from {{Section 4 of RFC3542}} and {{Section 6 of RFC4007}};
for symmetry this is also provided for IPv4 as in {{RFC4001}} and {{RFC6991}}.
The zone identifier may be an integer, in which case it is to be interpreted as the interface index.
It may be a text string, in which case it is to be interpreted as an interface name.

As explained in {{RFC4007}} the zone identifiers are strictly local to the node.
They are useful for communications within a node about connected addresses (for instance, where a link-local peer is discovered by one daemon, and another daemon needs to be informed).
They may also have utility in some management protocols.

In the cases where the Interface Format is being used to represent
only an address with a zone identifier, and no interface prefix information, then the prefix length may be replaced with the CBOR "null" (0xF6).


## IPv6

IANA has allocated tag 54 for IPv6 uses.
(This is the ASCII code for '6'.)

An IPv6 address is to be encoded as a sixteen-byte byte string
({{Section 3.1 of RFC8949}}, major type 2), enclosed in Tag number 54.

For example:

~~~~
54(h'20010db81234deedbeefcafefacefeed')
~~~~

An IPv6 prefix, such as 2001:db8:1234::/48 is to be encoded as a two element array, with the length of the prefix first.
See {{validity}} for the detailed construction of the second element.

For example:

~~~~
54([48, h'20010db81234'])
~~~~

An IPv6 address combined with a prefix length, such as being used for
configuring an interface, is to be encoded as a two element array,
with the (full-length) IPv6 address first and the length of the
associated network the prefix next; a third element can be added for
the zone identifier.


For example:

~~~~
54([h'20010db81234deedbeefcafefacefeed', 56])
~~~~

The address-with-prefix form can be reliably distinguished
from the prefix form only in the sequence of the array elements.

Some example of a link-local IPv6 address with a 64-bit prefix:

~~~~
54([h'fe8000000000020202fffffffe030303', 64, 'eth0'])
~~~~

with a numeric zone identifier:

~~~~
54([h'fe8000000000020202fffffffe030303', 64, 42])
~~~~

An IPv6 link-local address without a prefix length:

~~~~
54([h'fe8000000000020202fffffffe030303', null, 42])
~~~~

Zone identifiers may be used with any kind of IP address, not just Link-Local addresses.
In particular, they are valid for multicast addresses, and there may still be some significance
for Globally Unique Addresses (GUA).


## IPv4

IANA has allocated tag 52 for IPv4 uses.
(This is the ASCII code for '4'.)

An IPv4 address is to be encoded as a four-byte byte string
({{Section 3.1 of RFC8949}}, major type 2), enclosed in Tag number 52.


For example:

~~~~
52(h'c0000201')
~~~~

An IPv4 prefix, such as 192.0.2.0/24 is to be encoded as a two element array, with the length of the prefix first.
See {{validity}} for the detailed construction of the second element.

For example:

~~~~
52([24, h'c00002'])
~~~~


An IPv4 address combined with a prefix length, such as being used for
configuring an interface, is to be encoded as a two element array,
with the (full-length) IPv4 address first and the length of the
associated network the prefix next; a third element can be added for
the zone identifier.

For example,  192.0.2.1/24 is to be encoded as a two element array,
with the length of the prefix (implied 192.0.2.0/24) last.

~~~~
52([h'c0000201', 24])
~~~~

The address-with-prefix form can be reliably distinguished
from the prefix form only in the sequence of the array elements.

# Tag validity {#validity}

This section discusses when a tag 54 or tag 52 is valid ({{Section
5.3.2 of -cbor}}).
As with all CBOR tags, validity checking can be handled in a generic
CBOR library or in the application.
A generic CBOR library needs to document whether and how it handles
validity checking.

The rule `ip-address-or-prefix` in {{cddl-types}} shows how to check the
overall structure of these tags and their content, the ranges of
integer values, and the lengths of byte strings.
An instance of tag 52 or 54 is valid if it matches that rule and, for
ipv6-prefix and ipv4-prefix, the considerations of Sections
{{<valid-encoder}} and {{<valid-decoder}}.

## Deterministic Encoding

The tag validity rules, combined with the rules in {{Section 4.2.1 of
-cbor}}, lead to deterministic encoding for tags 54 and 52 and require
no further Additional Deterministic Encoding Considerations as per
{{Section 4.2.2 of -cbor}}.

## Encoder Considerations for Prefixes {#valid-encoder}

For the byte strings used as the second element in the array
representing a prefix:

(1) An encoder MUST set any unused bytes, and any unused bits in the
final byte, if any, to zero.
Unused bytes/bits are bytes/bits that are not covered by the prefix length given.
So for example, `2001:db8:1230::/44` MUST be encoded as:

~~~~
54([44, h'20010db81230'])
~~~~

even though variations like:

~~~~
54([44, h'20010db81233'])
54([44, h'20010db8123f'])
54([44, h'20010db8123012'])
~~~~

start with the same 44 bits, but are not valid.

(Analogous examples can be constructed for IPv4 prefixes.)

(2) An encoder MUST then omit any right-aligned (trailing) sequence of
bytes that are all zero.

There is no relationship between the number of bytes omitted and the prefix length.
For instance, the prefix 2001:db8::/64 is encoded as:

~~~~
54([64, h'20010db8'])
~~~~


## Decoder Considerations for Prefixes {#valid-decoder}

A decoder MUST check that all unused bits encoded in the byte string
ipv6-prefix-bytes/ipv4-prefix-bytes, i.e., the bits to the right of
the prefix length, are zero.

A decoder MUST also check that the byte string does not end in a zero
byte.

Since encoders are required to remove zero-valued trailing bytes, a
decoder MUST handle the case where a prefix length specifies that more
bits are relevant than are actually present in the byte-string.

As an example, ::/128 is encoded as

~~~~
54([128, h''])
~~~~

### Example implementation

A recommendation for prefix decoder implementations is to first create
an array of 16 (or 4) zero bytes.

Then taking whichever is smaller between (a) the length of the
included byte-string, and (b) the number of bytes covered by the
prefix-length rounded up to the next multiple of 8: fail if that
number is greater than 16 (or 4), and then copy that many bytes from
the byte-string into the byte array.

Finally, looking at the number of unused bits in the last byte (if
any) of the range covered by the prefix length, check that any unused
bits in the byte string are zero:

~~~ c
unused_bits = (8 - (prefix_length_in_bits % 8)) % 8;
if (length_in_bytes > 0 &&
    (address_bytes[length_in_bytes - 1] & ~(0xFF << unused_bits))
       != 0)
  fail();
~~~


# CDDL

For use with CDDL {{-cddl}}, the typenames defined in {{cddl-types}}
are recommended:

~~~~ cddl

ip-address-or-prefix = ipv6-address-or-prefix /
                       ipv4-address-or-prefix

ipv6-address-or-prefix = #6.54(ipv6-address /
                               ipv6-address-with-prefix /
                               ipv6-prefix)
ipv4-address-or-prefix = #6.52(ipv4-address /
                               ipv4-address-with-prefix /
                               ipv4-prefix)

ipv6-address = bytes .size 16
ipv4-address = bytes .size 4

ipv6-address-with-prefix = [ipv6-address,
                            ipv6-prefix-length / null,
                            ?ip-zone-identifier]
ipv4-address-with-prefix = [ipv4-address,
                            ipv4-prefix-length / null,
                            ?ip-zone-identifier]

ipv6-prefix-length = 0..128
ipv4-prefix-length = 0..32

ipv6-prefix = [ipv6-prefix-length, ipv6-prefix-bytes]
ipv4-prefix = [ipv4-prefix-length, ipv4-prefix-bytes]

ipv6-prefix-bytes = bytes .size (uint .le 16)
ipv4-prefix-bytes = bytes .size (uint .le 4)

ip-zone-identifier = uint / text

~~~~
{: #cddl-types title="CDDL types for tags 54 and 52"}

# Security Considerations

This document provides an CBOR encoding for IPv4 and IPv6 address information.
Any applications using these encodings will need to consider the security
implications of these data in their specific context.  For example, identifying
which byte sequences in a protocol are addresses may allow an attacker or
eavesdropper to better understand what parts of a packet to attack.

Applications need to check the validity ({{validity}}) of a tag before
acting on any of its contents.
If the validity checking is not done in the generic CBOR decoder, it
needs to be done in the application; in any case it needs to be done
before the tag is transformed into a platform-specific representation
that could conceal validity errors.

The right-hand bits of the prefix, after the prefix-length, are set to
zero by this protocol.
(Otherwise, a malicious party could use them to transmit covert data
in a way that would not affect the primary use of this encoding.
Such abuse is detected by tag validity checking, and can also be
detected by examination of the raw protocol bytes.)

# IANA Considerations

IANA has allocated two tags from the Specification Required area of
the Concise Binary Object Representation (CBOR) Tags {{-tags}}:

## Tag 54 - IPv6

~~~~
Data Item: byte string or array
Semantics: IPv6, [prefixlen,IPv6], [IPv6,prefixpart]
~~~~

## Tag 52 - IPv4

~~~~
Data Item: byte string or array
Semantics: IPv4, [prefixlen,IPv4], [IPv4,prefixpart]
~~~~

## Tags 260 and 261

IANA is requested to add the note "DEPRECATED in favor of 52 and 54 for IP addresses" to registrations 260 and 261

--- back

# Changelog
{: removeinrfc="true"}

* 03
* 02
* 01 added security considerations about covert channel

# Acknowledgements
{: numbered="false"}

{{{Roman Danyliw}}}, {{{Donald Eastlake}}}, {{{Ben Kaduk}}}, {{{Barry Leiba}}}, and {{{Éric Vyncke}}} reviewed the document and provided suggested text.
{{{Jürgen Schönwälder}}} helped finding the history of IPv4 zone identifiers.
